# Transposable Element-Mediated Epigenomic Remodeling Drives Erythropoietin-Induced Neurogenesis in the Adult Hippocampus

Understanding the molecular mechanisms by which erythropoietin (EPO) is associated with neurogenesis is essential to harness its therapeutic potential for cognitive and neuropsychiatric disorders. Here, we employed single-nucleus assay for transposase-accessible chromatin sequencing (snATAC-seq), combined with single-nucleus RNA sequencing (snRNA-seq), to map the epigenomic and transcriptional landscapes of adult mouse hippocampus under recombinant human EPO (rhEPO) treatment. We discovered significant lineage-specific remodelling of chromatin accessibility predominantly in newly formed pyramidal neurons, highlighting a robust EPO-driven neurogenic response. Notably, transposable elements (TEs), particularly ancient LINEs and SINEs, emerged as critical cis-regulatory elements extensively bound by key neurogenic transcription factors such as NEUROD1/2, FOXG1, and ASCL1. Integrative analyses revealed that these TE-derived regulatory elements orchestrate gene networks involved in neuronal differentiation, synaptogenesis, and synaptic plasticity. Our findings highlight a previously unrecognised role of TEs as dynamic regulators in EPO-induced hippocampal re-wiring of gene regulatory networks associated with neurogenesis, establishing a valuable epigenomic resource for advancing therapeutic strategies targeting cognitive deficits and neurodegenerative conditions.

&nbsp;

<h2>Single-cell ATAC-seq library processing and alignment</h2>
snATAC-seq libraries were generated and processed using the Cell Ranger ATAC pipeline (v2.1.0, 10x Genomics). Raw reads from 8 hippocampal samples were aligned to the mm10 reference genome (refdata-cellranger-arc-mm10-2020-A-2.0.0). Peak-barcode matrices and fragment files were generated using cellranger-atac count and used for downstream analysis.

<h2>Unified-peak set workflow</h2>
Downstream analysis was performed in R using the Signac (v1.13.0) and Seurat (v5.1.0) packages. Individual peak files were merged into a unified peak set using reduce() from the GenomicRanges package, excluding peaks <20 bp or >10,000 bp. Cells with fewer than 500 fragments in peaks were filtered out. Chromatin assays were constructed for each sample using FeatureMatrix().
Each Seurat object was annotated using EnsDb.Mmusculus.v79, and quality control (QC) metrics were computed: transcription start site (TSS) enrichment, nucleosome signal, percent reads in peaks, and blacklist ratio (based on blacklist_mm10). Cells were filtered using quantile-based thresholds, excluding outliers (below 2nd or above the 98th percentile for key metrics) to remove low-quality cells and potential multiplets.
Filtered objects were merged, then the merged object was processed with normalization with RunTFIDF(), dimensionality reduction via latent semantic indexing (RunSVD()), batch correction with harmony (RunHarmony() using LSI dims 2–30), and UMAP embedding. Clusters were identified with FindNeighbors() and FindClusters() with resolution 0.8 and algorithm 1. Gene activity scores were calculated via GeneActivity() and log-normalized with NormalizeData() (scale factor = median of nCount_Activity). A preprocessed single-nucleus RNA-seq dataset (Singh et al., 2023) served as a reference for cell type annotation. Unmatching samples (A3, A5, B10, B12) were excluded. Anchors were computed using canonical correlation analysis (CCA) to predict cells in scATAC-seq dataset.

<h2>Sample-specific peak set workflow</h2>
In addition to the unified peak set approach, we conducted a complementary analysis using sample-specific peak sets generated by Cell Ranger ATAC. For each sample, peak-barcode matrices and fragment files were independently loaded, and chromatin assays were constructed using a minimum cell threshold of min.cells =10. Seurat objects were generated separately for each sample and subsequently merged for integrated downstream analysis. Gene annotations were added using the EnsDb.Mmusculus.v79 database. QC metrics were calculated for each cell, including TSS enrichment, nucleosome signal, percent reads in peaks, and the blacklist ratio. To ensure high-quality samples, cells were filtered using the following strict criteria: nCount_peaks between 3,000 and 30,000, pct_reads_in_peaks >15%, blacklist_ratio < 0.05, nucleosome_signal <4, and TSS.enrichment >3.
Dimensionality reduction and clustering were performed: normalization with RunTFIDF(), feature selection via FindTopFeatures(min.cutoff ='q0'), latent semantic indexing (LSI) using RunSVD() on dimensions 2 through 8, and UMAP embedding via RunUMAP(). Clusters were identified using FindNeighbors() and FindClusters() with algorithm 1. Gene activity scores were computed using GeneActivity() and log-normalized with NormalizeData(). Cell type annotations previously inferred from the unified peak set analysis were transferred to the sample-specific peak set dataset by matching shared cell barcodes. Cells without annotation were excluded from further analysis.
For analysis related to the Pyramidal cluster, pyramidal neurons were subset from the unified peak set dataset and subjected to reclustering to refine subtype resolution. To facilitate annotation, these cells were integrated with a previously annotated single-nucleus RNA-seq reference dataset (Singh et al., 2023) using CCA, with 30 dimensions and 10 nearest neighbors employed to identify cross-modality anchors. Uncharacterized or ambiguous Seurat clusters were either removed or reannotated based on their transcriptomic profiles and proximity to well-defined clusters in the reference dataset. The finalized annotations were then transferred to the corresponding pyramidal neuron populations within the sample-specific peak set dataset by matching shared cell barcodes.

<h2>Differential Accessibility (DA) Analysis</h2>
All rhEPO- and placebo-derived cells were combined within each cluster (seurat cluster, higher-level cell-type annotation, or pyramidal subclusters). We then executed FindMarkers (test.use = "LR", min.pct = 0.01, latent.vars = "nCount_peaks") in a one-versus-rest fashion to identify peaks that are intrinsically enriched or depleted in a given cluster relative to all other clusters. We used 0.01 as min.pct threshold to capture accessibility shifts in smaller subfractions of a population. Peaks passing FDR < 0.01 were considered cell-type DA peaks. Furthermore, to pinpoint treatment-dependent changes, we stratified cells by condition inside each cluster and ran FindMarkers() with min.pct = 0.01 in the LR framework, and depth correction was applied. Peaks with FDR < 0.01 were classified as condition DA peaks. In differences between defined clusters (cell-type DA peaks) or treatment-dependent changes (condition DA peaks), summits (peak mid-points) were annotated via TxDb.Mmusculus.UCSC.mm10.knownGene to the closest gene's promoter, binned by genomic context (promoter, exon, intron, intergenic) and intersected with RepeatMasker (mm10) to identify and quantify overlap with TEs. Low-complexity, satellite, RNA, rRNA, tRNA, scRNA, snRNA, RC, srpRNA, and ambiguous repeats (entries flagged with "?" such as "LINE?") were excluded from all TE analyses unless explicitly stated.

<h2>Cluster-resolved motif enrichment</h2>
Chromatin dynamics were analyzed in two complementary tiers: chromatin accessibility differences between defined clusters and treatment-dependent changes. Vertebrate position-frequency matrices from the JASPAR-2020 CORE collection were added for motif analysis. For every Seurat cluster, higher-level cell-type annotation, or pyramidal subclusters, identified DA peaks using FindMarkers were filtered as min.pct threshold is 0.10, only positive, and FDR < 0.05. Clusters contributing ≥ 10 significant peaks were subjected to motif enrichment with FindMotifs(). Likewise, within the same clustering framework, cells were split by condition, and DA peaks filtered with min.pct threshold is 0.10, only positive, and FDR < 0.05 parameters were used for motif analysis. For any cluster yielding ≥ 10 rhEPO-responsive peaks, FindMotifs() was run to identify transcription-factor motifs enriched in rhEPO-gained chromatin. 

<h2>Transcription-factor ChIP-seq integration</h2>
Genome-wide binding profiles for 13 neurodevelopmental transcription factors (ASCL1, EGR1, FOS, FOXG1, FOXO3, JUN, NEUROD1, NEUROD2, NEUROG2, PAX6, SOX2, TBR1) were downloaded from GEO, (Table S17). Peak files were lifted over to the mm10 assembly where necessary (UCSC liftOver) and collapsed into non-redundant consensus regions with bedtools merge function. To ask whether individual TFs preferentially occupy repeat-derived regulatory DNA, we quantified intersections between each consensus ChIP peak set and RepeatMasker annotations using regioneR; 1000 permutations provided empirical P values and observed/expected overlap ratios. TE-associated peaks were assigned to the nearest transcription-start site with ChIPseeker (TxDb.Mmusculus.UCSC.mm10.knownGene) and subjected to GO-biological-process enrichment with clusterProfiler::enrichGO (BH-adjusted q ≤ 0.01). Next, TF peaks were overlapped with the 11 broad cell-class DA peak lists and the refined pyramidal-lineage DA peaks identified in our snATAC-seq analysis.

<h2>Citation</h2>
Transposable Element-Mediated Epigenomic Remodeling Drives Erythropoietin-Induced Neurogenesis in the Adult Hippocampus
Umut Cakir, Melanie Fritz, Umer Javed Butt, Riki Kawaguchi, Daniel Geschwind, Klaus-Armin Nave, Hannelore Ehrenreich, Manvendra Singh
bioRxiv 2025.10.13.682070; doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.13.682070

&nbsp;
 
```bibtex
@article{cakir2025epoTE,
  author    = {Cakir, Umut and Fritz, Melanie and Butt, Umer Javed and Kawaguchi, Riki and Geschwind, Daniel and Nave, Klaus-Armin and Ehrenreich, Hannelore and Singh, Manvendra},
  title     = {Transposable Element–Mediated Epigenomic Remodeling Drives Erythropoietin-Induced Neurogenesis in the Adult Hippocampus},
  journal   = {bioRxiv},
  year      = {2025},
  doi       = {10.1101/2025.10.13.682070},
  url       = {https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.13.682070}
}
